# Examining Claims Regarding Pacific Decadal Oscillation and Climate Change
This article titled *"The Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO): Key to the Global Warming Debate?"* proposes that the increasing temperatures, specifically in the northern hemisphere, are not primarily attributed to carbon emissions from mankind, but rather a phenomenon known as Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO). The author defines PDO as an “internal switch between two slightly different circulation patterns that occurs every 30 years or so in the North Pacific Ocean” with alternating positive (warm) and negative (cool) phases (Spencer, 2008). Spencer backs up this claim by explaining that changes in weather circulation patterns, like PDO, can result in changes in global cloud coverage. Since cloud coverage has the largest internal control global temperatures (through their ability to reflect sunlight), the author suggests that changes in cloudiness associated with the PDO can explain most of the climate change we’ve seen in the last 100 years (Spencer, 2008). This article is of interest due to the particular reason that it suggests a contrary major cause of global temperature rise and at first glance provides seemingly credible and convincing evidence.

 
To assess the credibility of this argument, one can first look at the purpose and intended audience. The purpose of this article appears to be to provoke thoughts and inform the general public on whether or not climate change is natural or manmade. Spencer states this explicitly in a section of his website where the article was posted titled “Global warming: natural or manmade?” One can then examine the author's background. Dr. Roy Warren Spencer received his Ph.D. in meteorology at the University of Wisconsin-Madison in 1981. Before becoming a Principal Research Scientist at the University of Alabama in Huntsville in 2001, he was a Senior Scientist for Climate Studies at NASA’s Marshall Space (NASA, 2011). Dr. Roy Spencer has also received awards such as the NASA Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal in 1991 and the AMS Special Award in 1996 (NASA, 2011). Based on his background and qualifications, it is reasonable to say that Dr. Roy Spencer is highly qualified to be writing about this topic. However, this article was posted on his own personal website and therefore has not undergone the peer review process making this article slightly less credible. 

The article does not provide any sources as the information is coming from Dr. Roy Spencer’s knowledge obtained from working and researching in this field. However, adding sources to back up the author’s knowledge would make this article more credible. It appears that there are many more scientific and peer-reviewed articles suggesting the opposite as Spencer. To summarize the contrary evidence, researchers say that since the PDO follows an oscillatory behaviour there is no trend associated with both global temperature rise (Kwon et al., 2013). Researchers say that the PDO moves heat through different parts of our climate system but is unable to generate nor retain heat and thus cannot be the major cause of the long term global warming trend (Veettil et al., 2017). Therefore, it appears to be a disconnect between Spencer’s argument and the current scientific consensus. Although the article produced by Spencer was released on his website in 2008, based on the current literature there seems to be no new significant information that would change Dr. Spencer’s argument. Instead, it appears that there is a different interpretation of the data creating an argument that contradicts the mainstream scientific consensus. Additionally, Dr. Roy Spencer is known for being a meteorologist with contrarian views on climate change which may introduce bias into his work as he focuses on contradicting the current consensus on major causes for climate change.

In conclusion, Dr. Roy Spencer’s background does equip him with the tools to write about the topic of climate change. In this article, it appears that he chooses to “cherry pick” data and implement different models than the most researchers to provide evidence that PDO is a major cause of global temperature rise. However, as everything on Earth is interconnected, it is plausible that PDO may influence climate change on a small scale but not as the main factor as Spencer suggests. It is important for articles like this one to be further discussed and challenged with evidence and facts to further our understanding of the factors contributing to climate change.


## References
Kwon, M., Yeh, S.-W., Park, Y.-G. and Lee, Y.-K., 2013. Changes in the linear relationship of ENSO–PDO under global warming. International Journal of Climatology, 33(5), pp.1121–1128.

NASA, 2011. Aqua Project Science. [online] Web.archive.org. Available at: <https://web.archive.org/web/20130216184346/http://aqua.nasa.gov/about/team_spencer.php> [Accessed 11 February 2021].

Spencer, R., 2008. The Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO): Key to the Global Warming Debate? [online] Drroyspencer.com. Available at: <http://www.drroyspencer.com/global-warming-background-articles/the-pacific-decadal-oscillation/> [Accessed 10 February 2021].

Veettil, B., Wang, S., Florêncio de Souza, S., Bremerac, U. and Simõesc, J., 2017. Pacific Decadal Oscillation. [online] Sciencedirect.com. Available at: <https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/earth-and-planetary-sciences/pacific-decadal-oscillation> [Accessed 11 February 2021].
